>>DR. SUE MORTER: Did you know
that inside our own bodies
exists an entire universe
teeming with life, including
bacteria, viruses, fungi.
And guess what?
We need them.
Our hormones, mood, cognitive
function, and healing potential
depends on the health
of our microbiome.
Dr. Grace Liu, also known as the
Gut Goddess, is here to tell us
how our physical
and mental health
can be understood by looking
at the delicate balance
of microorganisms in our gut.
And I know that you have
a personal story that
got you interested in this
trajectory of becoming
a clinician.
Maybe we could start there?
>>DR. GRACE LIU:
I would love to.
Little did I know when I
went to pharmacy school,
and studied traditional
conventional medicine
in pharmacy school,
that our microbiome
and their metabolites--
the chemicals they emit--
actually are like a pharmacy.
They are healing, and instead
of pharmaceuticals, they
actually get to the
root issue and even
reverse damage and disease.
So when I grew up actually,
my little sisters and I,
we lost our mom to a
tragic fatal car accident.
And it really changed
our trajectory.
I didn't realize how
the trauma actually,
until one of my shaman
last year, I work with,
mentioned this is the
biggest trauma anyone could
have before age 15.
It really shaped a lot.
And after 20 years of
conventional medicine
as a pharmacist, I actually
had my own health crisis.
Too many antibiotics.
My dad actually is a surgeon, so
every sniffle, fever, and cough
we had, we got
treated really well.
I mean, it was great.
But back then, my dad
didn't know either
that the microbiome
was so important.
It's literally half
of our body cells.
If we consider them as
a organ, a silent organ,
they're literally half of
us, the number of cells.
>>SUE: So the things
that antibiotics affect
include half of who we are?
>>GRACE: Exactly.
>>SUE: And that's a lot.
It's a huge--
>>GRACE: It's tremendous.
The first count was wrong.
Yeah, and that now
that scientists
are counting every
cell of our human body,
including red blood
cells, white blood cells,
and they're literally 1 to 1.
And through evolutionary time,
if people believe in evolution,
we've had this other
half the entire time.
They break down food for us.
They keep us healthy, strong,
and happy, feeling whole.
There's nothing we can't do
better with them on our side,
as allies.
So little did I know--
every sniffle, fever, cough,
despite feeling a little better
on antibiotics,
little did we know
that actually losing and
depleting that other half,
that microbiome,
would make us more
vulnerable for another
cold, another infection,
another cough, sniffle,
cold, bronchitis, asthma,
and other things.
Medicine just does
its best, right?
But we're so fortunate
and lucky now,
we have a whole field of
microbiome research now
that backs up a lot of things
we do in integrative medicine.
So I had my own health
crisis, but then
what was really important,
some of my best friends
had their health crises.
Two of my best friends, they
developed not just one cancer,
but two cancers.
And they were very young.
We were in our 40s, and both
actually had little children.
One had worked really
hard to have twins
on in vitro fertilization.
She not only was diagnosed
with breast cancer and ovarian,
she developed two cancers
at a very, very young age.
My other best friend developed
a breast lump and melanoma.
And their lives were
really threatened.
And I was threatened with
losing my best friends, my best
girlfriends.
And it really made me look at
what conventional medicine is
doing in our diet, and
our modern living, all
the antibiotics,
and it made sense.
I made a shift directly
to functional medicine
after my own health crisis.
And after losing my mom, and
learning from one of the shaman
I worked with last
year, that losing
a parent at such a
young age, below age 15,
is one of the major
traumas someone
could have in their life.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>GRACE: I had no idea.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>GRACE: And here,
my best friends
were threatened for their
kids for the same thing.
And one of my missions in
working with families, or moms
and dads, or anyone even
with a fur family, (LAUGHS)
is to prevent an early premature
death due to modern dysbiosis,
modern damage.
We can prevent all this.
It's not necessary at all.
And through our gut protocols
now, with microbiome medicine,
we've seen a lot of people
have great energy endurance,
and all their cancer
markers go down.
So we can prevent
so many things.
>>SUE: What was
the health crisis
that you were
experiencing that really
got your attention in this way?
>>GRACE: It was through
pharmaceuticals actually,
a modern intervention.
So we come from a family
of very fertile women.
My sisters and I
are super fertile.
And I had two children
already, and wanted
to prevent some fertility--
too much fertility for our case.
We were lucky in that regard.
So I had a Mirena IUD,
an intrauterine device
which emits hormones.
And in this modern
day, we have a lot
of xenoestrogens, which are
toxic chemicals like plastics,
thalates, flame retardants.
They cause estrogenic
effects on people's bodies.
Well, the device I had, it's
a hormone drug that reduces
fertility-- it's
a birth control--
and it's a xenoprogestin.
So I had actually
toxicity of progestin.
And it affected all
my organ systems.
I had immune deficiency,
major gut issues.
All birth control is associated
with gut dysbiosis-- leaky gut,
hyperpermeability of the gut,
gut problems, B12, and other B
vitamin, and other
vitamin deficiencies, zinc
deficiencies.
And I had it in a
really major way.
Perhaps my genetics
and ancestry aren't
adapted for hormone imbalances.
And then I had, of
course, antibiotics.
I had a dental implant put in
that I probably didn't need.
It was a foreign
object, which ends up
being a magnet for
pathogens if you
don't have a great gut
microbiome or the mouth
bacteria that live there.
So I had incredible
fatigue for eight years.
No one could figure it out.
I actually worked
with some of the best
in functional medicine.
They really all helped me.
Really great, but to
get to the root issue
was a little tougher,
because I had
just so many things going on.
>>SUE: Like the perfect storm.
Couple all of this on top of the
fact that you lost your mother,
and then shuts down our
emotional centers, which
happens to be in the gut also.
>>GRACE: Happens
to be in the gut.
>>SUE: And so, the
energies combined
with all the
antibiotic therapies
that you were being handed with
all the best of intentions.
You've said that we've had to
pay a price for these advances
in Western medicine.
Can you say a little
bit more about that?
>>GRACE: That's
exactly right, Dr. Sue.
In this modern day and age, we
don't get massive infections
and die.
At one point actually I had a
third-degree burn on my leg.
And I'm really grateful
I had steroids,
and IV antibiotics
that prevented me
from having infection
and my leg cut off.
Maybe another day my leg would
have been cut off actually.
And we don't have plagues, we
don't have wild rampant TB,
or other wild infections.
And our water is
clean, and sanitized.
We don't have dysentery
all day, every day,
like some third-world
countries because they're not
looking at data.
>>SUE: Yes, we're blessed.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
On the flip side, now
we have other diseases
that afflict all of us.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>GRACE: Lot of brain
fog, a lot of body
fat issues, composition,
metabolic syndrome,
cardiovascular disease,
strokes, heart attacks, cancers,
other kinds of
inflammatory diseases.
It's so funny, my parents
and all my extended family--
aunts, uncles,
grandparents-- they all
live very long lives
to 90, even 100,
with very little
chronic conditions.
But my sisters, and I,
and my little brother,
we all developed an
autoimmune disease very young.
And knowing now what
microbiome medicine is about,
and the role of the
microbiome, our other half,
in protecting against
chronic diseases,
we understand that those
antibiotics likely set up
a pathway for these conditions.
>>SUE: Yes, they not
only kill the bad bugs,
they take out some
of the good bugs.
And the next thing
you know, we have
none of this family of
organisms that are attempting
to transmute, and
translate, and receive
benefits, receive our
nutrients, and help us
get rid of what we don't need.
>>GRACE: Precisely.
>>SUE: All of this
is just cut away
with the best of intentions.
>>GRACE: Yes.
>>SUE: And so, we
end up with a culture
that is compromised in the gut.
Interesting, I've never
taken an antibiotic.
I was raised in a natural
health care environment.
And so, we come from these
opposite ends of the spectrum,
and here we are today
having a conversation
bringing it all together.
And thank you so much
for your perspective,
because it is so
helpful for people
to recognize that while a little
bit of a good thing is good,
too much of a good
thing is not so good.
And now, we have to turn our
attention regarding our health
care in a different direction.
So what's your experience
with Western cultures
and the health of their gut,
versus non-Western cultures
and the health of their gut?
Is there research,
or do you have
data on that, how we compare
to the rest of the world?
>>GRACE: Absolutely.
It's so fascinating.
Here in the Western
world, studies
are showing even after
one course of antibiotics,
we are losing and depleting
such a great amount
of our microbiome, we
literally can lose 1/3 or 2/3
of our whole microbiome with
even one course of antibiotics.
And it never reverts
back for some people.
Not everybody.
And then microbiome studies
are showing in Amish--
people in US, who have
more of a rural background.
They live with their animals.
They're very close
with their animals,
and they don't have
antibiotics or health care.
And centenarians people
who live to over 100.
The Blue Zone areas--
I'm sure you and your audience
are really familiar with them
through National Geographic.
Many of them can
eat anything they
want-- gluten, dairy, anything.
They live healthy long
lives to over 100,
with chronic disease-free
cancer-free lives,
and they have literally
no antibiotics.
When they look at
their microbiome,
they're fully intact.
Same with hunter gatherers
all over Africa, Malawi,
rainforests, their
microbiome is very diverse.
And they have species
that we don't see anymore,
that are literally extinct
in the Western world.
And it's so fascinating to
compare these individuals
and groups, and see
how healthy they are.
And some of these
individuals smoke, right?
Even overweight a little bit.
No big deal.
They're super healthy.
They don't have diabetes.
They don't have any chronic
afflictions like we do.
So the way I look
at the microbiome,
it's of like a wealth portfolio.
Here in the Western world,
we're bankrupt in terms
of our microbiome.
And then, yet these cultures
have little health care--
probably very high infant
mortality and maternal
mortality through childbirth--
but on the other side,
they're very healthy and
have a disease-free life.
They're very happy, generally
speaking, and feel whole.
And they have great
diversity, lots
of assets in their
gut microbiome,
and little liabilities.
>>SUE: An excellent portfolio.
What everyone is looking for.
>>GRACE: Yeah, and
you've had that.
You're so lucky.
It's rare.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SUE: Well, and
we're also looking
at the mind-body relationship
in the work that I do.
And what you're sharing
with this big crisis
in your early life,
of losing your mother,
it makes perfect sense
that the idea of self-love
isn't present because that
nurturing presence isn't there,
and the next thing
you know, it's
translating chemically
inside of our systems
in a compromising way as well.
>>GRACE: There's multiple
factors, Yeah, absolutely.
>>SUE: So how wonderful
that you're here.
You're not only
surviving, you're
thriving because you're turning
your attention onto what
matters most, and sharing
it with other people.
So we're so grateful
to have you here.
Who are the clients
that come to you?
Who is it that you end
up connecting with?
>>GRACE: We have such a
great fanhood out there.
I work with really smart
moms, multitasking moms.
I work with executives
and endurance athletes,
particularly MMA fighters also.
I help with the
supplement programs.
We help reduce body fat, brain
fog, and fatigue in six months
or less.
>>SUE: And how do you do that?
What do you go about doing?
>>GRACE: When
people work with us,
we have some precise protocols,
and we go through four phases.
And it's a lengthy program--
six to eight months minimum.
And we do testing.
Everything is evidence-based.
And I teach.
I teach a 50-hour gut
certification program
for coaches and clinicians.
Through the four phases,
we look at what's
in the gut and the microbiome.
We compare the assets
and the liabilities.
We help people who have
bankruptcy or gut debt
and lot of liabilities.
We reduce those for them, and
then we build in diversity.
Just like a wealth
portfolio would
have bonds, and stocks,
and real estate,
and a lot of diverse assets,
dividend-building assets,
we help to build that back in.
The species and
genera that we know
are really healthy
in the other half.
If it's depleted
1/3 or 2/3 we start
to rebuild all that
on a good foundation.
>>SUE: Rebuilding?
>>GRACE: Rebuilding
the microbiome
and bringing back species, and
feeding them, anchoring them,
so that they can keep working
for the person and the host.
I learned pharmacy, and
I taught in pharmacy,
and I didn't realize
when learning
the conventional medicine route
of learning, I had no idea--
and neither did none of my
doctor friends or pharmacy
friends-- realized that
our microbiome, our poop,
literally nourishes
and feeds us.
And unlike a pharmaceutical,
it doesn't just
put a Band-Aid on a symptom or
sign, it actually reverses it,
to the degree where the
disease and damage disappear
completely.
And this is from our
microbiome, our other half,
they make these metabolites
and chemicals that are healing,
protective for us, and keep
all the pathogens at bay
so they don't invade, and
get into our bloodstream,
and do damage, and
things like that.
>>SUE: And so, then you
find this deficiency,
or an imbalance in
their portfolio,
you see that they're weighted
way too much on this,
and not enough in
this department.
>>GRACE: Right.
>>SUE: And you then
deliver the solution how?
>>GRACE: We have the protocol.
So some clients come to us,
they are leaders in their field,
they are proponents and
advocates of a certain diet.
Even with a perfect diet,
they still can come to us
and their portfolio's
completely off.
You can't resurrect
what's not there.
So we have to regain
and rebuild what's
missing with the
protocols, and introduced
species and genera
that are missing
or at very, very
low counts, and we
help to resurrect
them, in other words.
And what we end up
seeing in just two
or three months or less,
people feel amazing.
Some clients of ours, they've
had fatigue for literally
decades, and they didn't realize
they had so many issues that
was related to their gut.
They had 10, 20, 30
rounds of antibiotics.
They didn't realize.
Or they had a dividing point.
A gastroenteritis diarrhea
event 30 years ago,
and then they were never
the same after that.
So we can take out our
good flora in many ways,
but it usually starts with
some kind of depletion.
Mom could have been depleted.
Mom could have had a
couple antibiotic rounds,
and her legacy that she passed
to the child wasn't great.
Or the baby was born
with a c-section.
I had a twilight birth, so
that was probably traumatic.
Our birthing methods,
they're awesome.
I think they save
lives, but they
may lead to a faulty depleted
microbiome for the baby.
>>SUE: Specifically how?
>>GRACE: Mom's vaginal
canal generally
has all the great species that
protect the next generation.
So if it's a c-section,
we're going to bypass that.
And studies are showing that
even doing a vaginal swab,
and swabbing the baby at
birth after a c-section,
isn't enough.
Mom literally delivers
trillions to the baby,
and maybe through her poop.
Because it's very natural
in the animal kingdom.
Moms poop on their
babies a little bit.
For herbivores,
it's very essential.
Camels, cows, elephants--
herbivore eating animals--
if their mom doesn't deliver
some poop to the baby,
the baby never can
digest food properly.
They'll die early.
And we're so scared in
the modern age of poop.
So hyper-sanitary, hyper-hygiene
and super-sanitary.
Let's alcohol swipe everybody.
I've met families where the more
alcohol, disinfectants, Clorox
they use, the more diseases
are in the children.
Early Type 1 diabetes, ADHD,
autism, things like that.
Our cleaning
practices are probably
damaging our microbiome in every
generation that's following us.
It's kind of sad, in my opinion.
>>SUE: Yes.
I grew up on a farm,
and the whole reminds me
that you'd get sick and the
answer was, rub some dirt
in it, you'll be fine.
>>GRACE: Exactly.
I've heard that so many times.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
>>SUE: And that's
kind of what you're
doing, in a little bit
more sophisticated fashion,
with these re-supplementation.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
>>SUE: Now, you even
advise gut supplementation
to MMA fighters.
Can you expound on that for us?
>>GRACE: Yeah, my
fighters love it.
We do a bionic fiber
blend with many of them,
or a higher fiber diet.
A soluble with steel-cut
oatmeal, and maybe a scoop
of macca for rejuvenation.
It's a root with also
great prebiotic properties.
And the fiber is a blend.
Anyone can make it.
We have different
recipes on our website.
But we want to feed the entire
portfolio of our microbiome,
so we need different
kind of fibers.
And our ancestors-- studies
show in the Paleolithic age,
before Walmart and
supermarkets appeared,
we foraged a lot of food.
We spent all day
forging food, all day
eating and chewing food, right?
And the fiber content was
predicted to be about 100,
130 grams of fiber a day.
But literally,
Americans now almost
eat barely five to
seven grams a day.
Even in the Paleo
diet, which I love,
or other diets that
are gut-healing,
maybe no more than two to
three grams of fiber a day.
So we build some fiber, 20
to 30 grams supplementation.
It could be some
organic psyllium fiber,
with some inulin, glucomannan,
which is a gooey root fiber.
There's so many amazing
different prebiotics
that we're so lucky
to have access to now,
that we can rebuild
a lot of our gut.
I'm into the TV show
from our generation
called The Bionic Man
and the Bionic Woman.
[LAUGHTER]
You probably remember
if you watched TV, yeah.
We didn't watch a lot of TV,
but we were able to watch some.
So we can rebuild
beyond where we started,
and feel even better
than where we started,
because most people
have grown up
eating these pretty awful
standard American diets
with low fiber growing up.
So they actually feel
better than they ever
have their whole lives, even
before their teens and 20s.
They're calmer, happier,
and they perform better.
The MMA fighters, I try
to protect their brains.
We do brain rebuilding
programs as well,
because there's a massive
gut-brain connection.
Not just hormones and
gonads gut connection,
but the brain connection.
And probiotics and
fiber are shown
to regenerate our neurons.
It's called BDNF, this hormone
that rebuilds the neurons
and prunes them properly.
>>SUE: Maybe we
should take a moment
and make sure that
our viewers know what
MMA fighters are dealing with.
>>GRACE: Yeah, so mixed martial
art fighters are really amazing
endurance athletes.
They know multiple
martial arts, and they're
doing a lot of
endurance training,
and also burst training--
heavy lifting.
And they fight in a
cage, so when they fight,
they can get hit in the head.
That's part of the goal, to
knock the other person out.
So there's a bit
of brain damage,
and we know that whenever
our brain breaks,
our gut will break.
So I do a lot to help
protect their guts.
And we do probiotics-- all
diverse kinds of probiotics,
from soil-based probiotics,
to one of our own signature
probiotics.
Covers all the strains that
we need, from baby, to birth,
and up all the way until
80s, 90s, 100 years old
for longevity.
And we build in the fiber to
anchor them and feed them,
and the fiber's really critical.
Yeah.
>>SUE: And this is true also
for people who are not choosing
to fight in cages and have
their heads potentially kicked
by something--
>>GRACE: Yeah, like for
instance, executives like you,
who run empires and travel.
Yeah, executives who make
important financial decisions,
or they have
employees under them,
to have the best decisions
for their employees
and the families they feed.
And moms-- a lot of our moms
are so multitasking now.
They do a 40-hour work week.
They go home, cook, clean, take
care of two to four children,
and two or three
dogs, and a husband.
Our moms are super-powered
totally amazing, Bionic moms.
I want to keep them healthy
as much as possible.
>>SUE: And oftentimes
working so much harder
to get life done than we
really need to be working.
But because we grew up inside
of a compromised situation,
people don't realize that it's
harder than it needs to be,
that the brain
fog isn't natural,
that fatigue isn't just
because you're getting older.
Actually, people could be
getting younger all the time,
if only we could turn the
system back into the way
that it was supposed
to be functioning.
>>GRACE: Exactly.
And that 2:00, 3:00
o'clock triple espresso,
it's not necessarily normal.
>>SUE: Right.
[LAUGHTER]
Just because it's
popular doesn't
mean we were born to
have to need that.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
>>SUE: So clients
come to you, and you
begin testing the gut
right off the bat.
>>GRACE: Yeah we want to
show them the testing.
>>SUE: You start
there because, why?
>>GRACE: We're very
evidence-based.
I teach our programs to
coaches and clinicians
so they can learn
how to do this,
and they always get
amazing results.
And everything's evidence-based.
We're really lucky,
in this day and age,
that the research
backs up what we do.
The botanicals we use, the
herbals and probiotics,
and how they turn on the
immune system in the right way.
We don't want either
too little or too less.
That's sweet zone.
Everything's our immune system.
80% of our immune
system's actually
in the gut, the large intestine
and in the small intestine.
And we can test that now.
We do noninvasive urine
organic acid testing.
We run that on everybody.
We can look at antibodies, which
are an arm of our immune system
and look at, what is
it fighting against?
Unfortunately, we
find a lot of people
are fighting against common
denominators in every gut,
and that's not right.
When we're launching attack
against flora that already live
in the gut, a lot of their
cell wall-- the proteins
and actually the
signature around them--
look like our thyroid, or
brain, or joints, or muscles,
or mitochondria.
And when we launch
attack against them,
people don't feel well.
It's basically an autoimmune
response going on.
Could be to our blood
vessels, then that
can lead to heart disease.
Could be to even pancreas cells.
That can look like
diabetes for some people.
So we look at some of
the antibodies going on.
And what we see is when
these antibodies go down,
people feel less anxious,
even not anxious at all.
They're able to
get off medication.
Some people have
attention deficit.
They're able to get
off medications.
They feel concentrated and
focused without medications.
It's awesome.
And we're alleviating
this conflict
going on in the body,
congestion and conflict.
Because of our immune
system, it's hypersensitive,
but in this day and age,
there's just too many
floating around friendly
fire, because we've
lost the component
of our microbiome.
>>SUE: Yeah.
We only have so much
energy, and if it's
being diverted into trying to
compensate for something that's
not happening, then
we end up experiencing
that loss of energy and vitality
just to get through our day,
much less maintain our immunity.
>>GRACE: Right, and there's
not enough espresso or yoga
that will fix that,
or kale or spinach.
Yeah.
>>SUE: Yeah, it'll take too
long, because the system that's
trying to metabolize
that good kale
or spinach that you're
eating isn't working right.
>>GRACE: It's extinct often.
Yes, yeah.
>>SUE: And it actually can
become toxifying to the system
when it is unable to
metabolize those things.
So when you're
doing this testing,
exactly what do you do?
When you talk about
the acid test,
can you just describe
the things that you do?
>>GRACE: Yes.
Yeah, I can.
So we'll do three simple tasks.
One is a stool kit.
It's not perfect, because
the large intestine
is just the last 1 and 1/2
meters of our big gut, which
is literally seven to 8
meters for most people.
But we like to look at the stool
testing, because often what's
overflowing from upstream
will also overflow
and show up on the stool kit.
So we'll do a stool kit.
I love the GI-Map.
I'll just throw it
out there, but there's
many really good
stool kits out there.
And I love the Thryve kit
too, because we can actually
drill down genera and species.
So these are the little names
of our wealth portfolio.
It's good to know what
they are in there.
The second is the immune panel
I told you about-- an IgG panel.
Often it looks at
food allergies.
I don't really look at
it for food allergies,
but I mostly look at it to
see what launched attacks
going on against certain flora.
>>SUE: So you're
asking someone, if you
eat this it responds how?
If you eat this, how
does it affect you?
Do you feel badly?
>>GRACE: For instance,
a lot of people
can't eat gluten when
they first work with us.
But within two to four weeks,
they'll get an exposure,
and they have no
problems at all.
And then in four,
six months, they
can eat it, no problem again.
OK, yeah.
>>SUE: An interesting thing.
We blame it on
the gluten, but it
might be that we're
just not able to digest
the gluten because we don't
have our system functioning
the way it's supposed to.
And so, it's some
of each, perhaps,
that we need to
address, which could
make us less afraid of
ever having to eat bread
in a restaurant somewhere.
So we just have to
turn our attention
to the whole picture
of what's going on,
instead of becoming
afraid and having to avoid
so many things in life.
>>GRACE: Yeah, we
can't keep just
restricting and restricting.
Yeah.
There's reasons I
think, behind it.
>>SUE: Because that doesn't
even lead to emotional health,
right?
If we're constantly having to--
>>GRACE: That fear, yeah.
It's a phobia, which is
not healthy for someone,
as you know, too.
And makes their
gut more permeable,
in my opinion, because that
increases cortisol, adrenaline,
and all these
hormones that actually
are known to impact the gut,
and make it more permeable.
>>SUE: Something that
might be helpful for people
to hear about,
the four protocols
that you're looking for,
and specifically what
the benefit of each of them is.
>>GRACE: So parasites
get a bad rap,
but in most of the modern world,
we have a lot of parasites that
people--
it's silent.
It's not seen.
In third-world countries,
parasites are rampant.
People get it through the
water or contact with animals,
and children from early ages are
getting anti-parasitic medicine
every year.
It's like candy, because
the burden is high,
and it will help
them to lower it.
But here in the
Western world, we
tend to think, oh,
no one has parasites.
But that's not really true.
And when we do testing
deeper, we always
find parasites,
100% of the time.
So we have four phases.
It starts from big microbe
to smaller microbe.
We go big to small.
So our first phase,
we look at the largest
potential parasitic
overgrowths in the gut.
And those are the larger
worms and protozoa,
like Giardia, which are really
common if you go camping.
Or Blastocystis if you
eat sushi or eat salads.
You may have exposure
to this in raw food--
raw sushi, raw fish, or raw
salads, things like that.
The second size down
is fungal overgrowth,
so Candida, yeast, Rhodotorula.
Many fungi live in our gut.
We have good ones.
There's certain
Mucor species that
are associated with leanness.
I won't mention it.
It's just a name--
Mucor.
But there's also
not great Mucor,
which associated
with morbid obesity,
diabetes, metabolic syndrome.
So there's bad fungi,
and they can overgrow.
Some of them even
move in our gut.
They have hyphae,
little branches.
They can completely
override someone's system
and cause a lot of
immune problems.
So fungi, about 100 to
10x bigger than bacteria.
So we take care of that.
We help look at those.
And then the third
phase are bacterial.
And bacteria range in all
sizes, but they can be
really small or kind of bigger.
We focus on bacteria.
And then the last
is viruses, and it
could be co-infections
and spirochetes too.
Here, Boulder, in Colorado,
there can be a lot of Lyme.
In California, we actually
have a lot of Lyme.
More than we thought, yeah.
And so we look at
different co-infections--
Lyme and viruses--
like, Epstein-Barr,
or cytomegalovirus,
HHV-6, Herpes family 6.
But there are many viruses
that we can encounter.
Our good flora, our other
good half, when we're depleted
and we're missing them, they
are actually our firewalls.
So in a way, it's like a
computer, someone's computer.
If you don't have
good firewalls,
you go and play on
a certain website,
you can get spammed, and
malware, and viruses.
You just collect it.
If it's really bad, you're
going to lose your hard drive,
get corruption of your
really important photos
and files, right?
So we rebuild the firewalls.
That's our ultimate goal.
>>SUE: You speak about
this organic acid testing.
>>GRACE: Yes.
>>SUE: Can you expand
on that a little bit.
>>GRACE: Oh, yeah.
I love the organic acid testing.
It's super non-invasive, so
we can do it in children.
It's the first morning urine,
and they freeze it, and send it
to the Great Plains lab.
That's the lab we prefer.
So organic acids
means it can assess
all the different small
chemicals that are in the body.
What's in the bloodstream
will eventually
be filtered through the kidney,
so we see it in the urine,
yeah.
And I love this test,
because on the first page
we have a whole
microbiome assessment.
The founder and CEO--
I'm sorry, he's the founder.
I think he used to be CEO.
But his name is
Dr. William Shaw.
He works with a lot of
autistic children, children
with neuro atypical
signs, as well as adults.
And he's really made this
test to be a great assessment
of what's going on in the
body for health, wellness,
and longevity.
I love it.
So the first page
is all microbiome.
And the first nine
signs on there,
the first nine lab markers,
are for fungal overgrowth.
So we see really what's
going on, and even
a little bit of mold.
If your firewalls
are down, you may
grow a little bit of mold spores
in your body and have mold.
It's not just from
diet exposures,
but there's some mold,
and we can see that.
And our register
to improve health,
we have low registers
compared to the lab,
so we see health really revive.
We see all the markers go
almost to zero, really low.
And then there's nine markers
for bacterial overgrowth,
which are very common, yeah.
Because when we lose our
good bacterial microbiome,
the good bacteria, then
the bad pathogenic,
really viral kind of
bacteria and overgrowing.
For instance, strep, or E. coli.
Clostridium is
particularly nasty,
and it's really neurologically
not very good too.
People can have a lot
of brain fog with it,
as well as either
diarrhea or constipation.
So Clostridium-- they
come from the family
where botulinum, Clostridium
difficile, and tetanus
came from, so they can really
impact the neurologic system
and neuromuscular junctions.
So people don't feel
right, or are clumsy.
Another part of this
test looks at oxalates.
And oxalates are like the
pollution in the human body.
And we have genetics
to actually help
us foster better
breakdown, so people
who don't have those
great genetics,
they may have more
problems with oxalates.
Oxalates also are found
in all our superfoods--
seeds, berries, kale, spinach,
a little bit whole grains.
Yet, we want all
these good foods,
but if someone has
really deep dysbiosis
and they have too much
fungal overgrowth--
so fungi are the big
producers of oxalates.
So we have three oxalate
markers on there,
and so we can know
when there's a lot
of fungal overgrowth, when
these are a little suboptimal.
And again, we have
a lower register.
When it's kind of above
1/5 of a median range,
we know something's
going on with the person.
And we want to work
on fungal overgrowths,
and mold in a mold overgrowth.
So people always feel better,
and they can eat more foods,
including the superfoods if
they had intolerances earlier.
>>SUE: And this is what
I wanted to clarify.
So we're checking for something,
it's in the superfoods,
but it can be existing in too
high of a quantity in the body?
>>GRACE: Yes.
>>SUE: And so, how are we
wanting to balance that out?
What do we do to balance that?
>>GRACE: That's a
fantastic question.
So when we have a
great microbiome,
and the full complement
of our microbiome.
We have bacteria that
break down oxalates for us.
There's a whole symphony
full of oxalate degraders,
they're known as.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
And our probiotic, the
signature one I made,
happens to have at least five
strains are inherently known
to break down oxalates.
They're actually species-wide
benefits, and characteristics,
and traits.
Kind of like dogs.
Bacteria are kind like dogs.
There's different traits.
One looks like a Labrador,
one looks like a Great Dane,
one looks like a little poodle.
And they have little traits,
like curly hair, straight hair,
human-like hair, non-allogeneic.
Our bacteria are like that too.
And we know, because
oxalates are in our food,
we have a whole complement
through evolution
that broke them down as
we evolved and started
eating these food--
seeds, berries,
some whole grains,
and a lot of greens
that are high in oxalates.
So when we lose them-- studies
show when we give antibiotics,
we lose that ability, and more
oxalates appear in the urine.
And certain probiotics, certain
bifido and lactobacilli,
for instance, the ones found
in our signature probiotic,
BIFIDO MAXIMUS, when probiotics
are used, oxalates go down.
They're more degraded,
and less show up in urine.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
What we find in our clients,
probiotics aren't enough.
So that's why we look
at overgrowths start
to ratchet down a little bit,
and resurrect what's missing.
>>SUE: Mm-hmm.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
And then we see about
the balance shift,
and almost instantly, in
two to four weeks or less,
people can start
expanding their diet.
When a lot of our
clients come to us,
they have so many
food allergies,
they literally don't even go
out with their friends, which
is super depressing, right?
>>SUE: Yeah.
It doesn't help the
healing process.
>>GRACE: Yeah, they
don't see their friends,
and laugh, and have that
fellowship, and the pheromones.
And they get tired of
explaining to their friends,
oh, I can't eat this and
that, and this and that.
They're down to
four foods on Earth.
We always see people
that expand to 40 foods
in about a month to four weeks.
Some of our children too.
They have really
broken gut microbiomes,
and mom has them on
very restricted diets.
One family, he
couldn't eat fish.
It was almost
anaphylactic reaction--
lip swelling.
Not tongue or throat
swelling, fortunately.
And within four weeks,
he was on our protocols,
started to sleep better--
he was having nightmares
all through his
naps and at night.
Within two weeks he started to
sleep deeper and no more nap
terrors.
Within four weeks,
his mom had him out,
and she just gave him salmon.
And I was like, OK.
I wouldn't have done that.
And she goes, oh, he was fine.
No problems at all.
And earlier he was literally,
almost anaphylactic reaction
to fish.
And the mom is a doctor herself,
and she's like, oh, he's fine.
I had my epi-pen I
was like, OK, good.
[LAUGHTER]
So we see these really
miraculous changes,
and I'm just so grateful
our protocols are effective,
and we have the tools available
now-- the testing, the tools,
probiotics to
resurrect, and then
certain fibers to
anchor everything
at the appropriate time.
>>SUE: What about iron levels?
>>GRACE: Oh, yeah.
So I've been fascinated
by the Viking heritage.
Not just from the TV
shows and Game of Thrones,
but I've always been fascinated.
[LAUGHTER]
They took over a
lot of the world.
The largest conquerors
of contiguous land
on Earth, right?
They were great migrators.
They're really
brilliant, sophisticated.
They're also matrilineal.
I don't know if
you're aware of that.
National Geographic had
this big display last fall,
and presentation.
>>SUE: No.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
Two of the biggest burials
were female burials.
Fascinating, huh?
Female monarchs that ruled.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
>>SUE: They're hiding it.
>>GRACE: It makes sense.
Yeah, yeah.
And Vikings conquered
a lot of great land,
and they can track literally
their entire migration
and conquering the land with
this hemochromatosis gene
marker--
HFE, hemochromatosis.
So they literally spread
this iron overload condition
to everywhere they went.
And who knows if this
evolutionary change
was adaptive?
At that time, grains
were more eaten.
Grains, if they're not soaked
and fermented by good bacteria
overnight or two in
water, the lectins--
I'm a nutrition
background person.
There's chemicals
in whole grains
called lectins and phytates.
And if they're not
soaked, if they're not
fermented by bacteria that
break them down overnight,
then whole grains can
bind our vital minerals.
So zinc, calcium,
magnesium, also iron.
So any iron that's in the
diet will get pulled out,
not absorbed by the body.
So there's perhaps
an adaptive thing
that happened genetically,
where people would accumulate
iron more, maybe to offset
the use of this amazing diet
food called whole grains, right?
Amaranth, millet,
oats, they were all
started to being eaten then.
>>SUE: Yes, the ancient
grains packed that.
>>GRACE: Yeah, yeah.
So anyway, hemochromatosis,
it's a great adaptation,
because it would
facilitate oxygen.
It's a way of doping the blood
to have energy and endurance
through long activities,
physical activities,
even though someone's not
eating iron-rich food or meat.
And it's so
interesting, we attract
a lot of really interesting
characters and clients,
and there are all
iron overloaded.
That seems to be
what we attract.
And I, myself, I'm
probably some kind
of genetic Asian warrior
type, because I've
a little iron overload too.
>>SUE: So how about the hormonal
system and the microbiome?
Can you speak into that,
and how this regulates,
and how it affects us?
>>GRACE: Yes.
I got really fascinated
with the hormone picture
in the microbiome because my
own health, but in our clients,
we see these rapid changes
in their hormone imbalance,
with no changes with
bioidentical hormones,
or really changing in terms
of their supplement habits
and programs for hormones.
And what we would see is, if
we just worked on the gut,
we'd see these instant
changes in their hormones,
to where they're
balanced naturally.
So women who had PMS, PMDD--
that means depression with
their menstrual cycle--
or cysts, fibroids, these
overgrowths associated
with female reproductive issues,
they would almost instantly
go away in a month or two.
Some of our ladies who have PCOS
and really severe facial hair,
having to shave every
day or every other day,
in two months or
less it was gone.
So I knew what we're on
to, really is helpful.
Some of our men, they'd be
young, in their '40s, '30s,
and they'd report to me, no
libido, no morning erection.
So they actually had a form
of erectile dysfunction,
being so young.
We'd hear quickly, in just
a month or two or less,
like full function in 80%
to 100% of every morning.
[LAUGHS]
One of my gentlemen, a
client, he had high PSA.
He had worked with
many practitioners.
His doctor couldn't
lower the PSA.
So he's a little
worried about cancer.
So PSA stands for
prostate specific antigen.
It's a marker for
prostate cancer.
And as you know, most prostate
cancers are slow-growing.
They're not going
to kill anybody,
but he was kind of concerned.
He had also Hashimoto's,
really common
low thyroid
autoimmune condition.
He had high antibodies, so
he'd worked with people,
not gotten the
results he wanted.
In two months or less,
we normalized his PSA,
his antibodies for
thyroid came way down.
And other clients, like our
male executives in their 50s,
we literally doubled
their total testosterone,
tripled their free testosterone,
because they start off so low
to begin with sometimes.
And even our younger men, great
results lowering the SHBG--
sex hormone-binding
globulin-- the brake,
and doubling a lot of their--
naturally no supplements,
other than supportive,
like adrenal glands.
And there's a study actually
by Kelton Tremellen,
from a pharmacy school,
University of South Australia
in Adelaide, he actually
tested giving the cell
wall parts of a flora
we all have in the gut,
and he gave this
dose of the cell
wall of a pro-inflammatory
gut pathogen.
And he gave a very low
dose to healthy men.
There were about 33 men.
They were age 18 to 40,
very healthy German men.
He gave a low dose--
0.8 nanograms per
kilo of weight,
and he saw within six hours,
their testosterone pretty much
tanked.
But our flora, if we have too
much, or our gut's permeable,
they're going to enter our body
systems and then cause havoc.
So that's what I've seen.
We were tightening and
sealing people's gut up,
and then that would
reverse on its own.
So yeah, it's really great
to see these studies start
to back up what
we're doing, that
has to do with this whole
complement of bacteria--
hundreds of trillions--
and how we can help them,
and bring back the allies, lower
some of the pathogens a bit,
and then we can see health
just instantly get better.
>>SUE: Yes, phenomenal.
Something that always
comes to mind for people
is, I wonder if my toxicity
levels are already up in such
a place that I needed a detox.
So it's a popular thing,
it's a popular question,
and I think it's really
relevant for us speak to.
Detox.
How can people do detox
correctly, safely?
What can you say about that?
>>GRACE: That's such a loaded
question, Dr. Sue, yeah.
I mean, I'm not the biggest
fan of detox protocols,
usually because
on the back end we
see clients who no
longer metabolize food
after a certain detox, yeah.
They don't have a great
gut biome to begin with.
When someone's
considering detox,
because we flush all our
pathogens through the gut,
we have to be able to
have stools twice a day,
minimum to let the toxins
go out that normally
are excreted through the stool.
So a lot people to
start with, they
don't have a great microbiome.
Now they're just unloading
toxins that are stored in fat,
and they have no receptacle
to safely unload them.
They're actually
going to recirculate
a lot of these toxins.
And there are studies that show
if people lose a lot of weight,
they're actually at
higher risk for mortality,
which is so unusual.
I lost 50 pounds myself.
That statistic shocked
me, and there are
many studies that show that.
And that's because now,
in our modern world,
we have so many
fat-stored toxins.
And when we unload
it too quick, and we
don't have the
facilities in our body
to bind them all up safely
and excrete them all safely,
then we're just going
to re-circulate that,
and that ends up
causing more problems.
All of sudden, you
of a nuclear dump,
but it's staying
in the body instead
of being safely excreted.
And then a lot of
the detox protocols
are very restricted diets,
and usually their fruit.
So fructose, if you don't
have bifido bacteria,
and a good complement of them--
we need good flora.
They help us with metabolizing
the fructose sugar in fruit.
If you don't have it,
you're going to cause--
if there's too much
fructose in the system,
we're going to cause
something called fatty liver.
So we actually need
these good bacteria.
That's why we have such an
epidemic now of fatty liver
and obesity.
Someone also could
be skinny fat.
It doesn't mean just
because they look skinny,
they actually are healthy.
Yeah, some overweight
people are healthier
than people who are skinny fat.
Because the skinny fat also
can have this congested liver
and inability to break down
common sugars in the diet,
because they're missing the good
bacteria and their liver tests
are high.
They're at risk for all
kinds of liver problems.
>>SUE: So just because
somebody looks thin
doesn't mean they're healthy.
We certainly know that for sure.
>>GRACE: Yeah.
>>SUE: So what if
somebody is going to say,
I'm going to detox.
Under these circumstances, in
this conversation, what would
you recommend that they make
sure is happening for them
before they would
begin such a thing.
>>GRACE: Yeah, have a
microbiome assessment.
So glad you brought it up.
We actually have a
Master Gut Class.
It's at the
thegutinstitute.com/8blast.
We have eight modules, so 8
Blast to help the gut improve.
And we love a product.
Actually, they're here in
Colorado, called Quicksilver.
Quicksilver is an amazing
company, if you're not aware.
Yeah, they have liver
tech kit called PushCatch.
So we detox with the
PushCatch, but we do it
after we've really
worked on the gut a bit.
And the PushCatch
is very gentle.
There's a little liver
sauce, and something
called ultrabinder.
I actually helper
to write up some
of the scientific background
about the ultrabinder.
It's amazing.
And it binds microtoxins, as
well as mold, xenoestrogens.
The things that get caught
in the modern body they bind,
even the toxins that come out
of the gut flora that are toxic,
bind them up a bit.
People generally feel really
great when they're taking it.
And heavy metals, it can
pull a bit of those out too.
Yeah.
>>SUE: Fabulous.
Fabulous to know.
And drinking lots of fluids,
and making sure always
that you're flushing
and flushing.
>>GRACE: Yeah, so probiotics,
actually you may not be aware,
but I gave a keynote at
the Environmental Medicine
Conference last year,
actually here in Colorado.
And several are bacteria,
which are also found
in BIFIDO MAXIMUS probiotic.
Some of the species in there
are known to break down
mycotoxins and glyphosate.
And these are common
now in our systems,
even organic wine is
full of glyphosate,
because our water
systems are contaminated.
>>SUE: Yes, and so
this is one of the ways
that we're approaching
detoxing from glyphosate.
>>GRACE: Unless someone goes
organic and has a detox system
that's competent.
We actually do urine
testing for glyphosate
for some of our clients.
Everyone's high.
Even if they've been
organic for 10, 20 years,
believe it or not.
I'm not sure if
it's because they're
missing the bacteria that
break down glyphosate,
or they're still
somehow getting it
somewhere-- in the
air, water, or food.
>>SUE: It's everywhere.
>>GRACE: It's in
restaurant foods.
>>SUE: So we're trying to
find ways to eat, to live,
that support the microbiome.
And there are so many
very popular approaches
to dietary programs
for a variety
of reasons, whether
it's health, or trying
to lose weight, or maintain
some kind of balance.
Keto diet, paleo
diet, speak to us
about what's happening there.
Long-term?
Short-term?
Do you recommend them?
>>GRACE: Yeah, I mean, I think
these diets are fatty in a way,
even though I'm like
a big fan of several,
and they seem to come
back every seven years.
So I think people really glom
onto because they're popular,
because they're
looking for a solution.
Well we have so
many gut problems,
and everyone's trying to
find an easy solution.
I don't blame them.
But all these diets
are very restrictive,
and they do work temporarily
for a great majority of people.
But the problem is
they're so restricted,
and when long-term
happens, it can actually
damage the gut microbiome.
This is what I see.
Because when they
starve out bad flora,
so that people have
less brain fog,
and they do actually
lose weight a lot faster
and burn fat better,
than often what I see
is they start to see
health problems occur.
I've heard of many cases where
people develop a new autoimmune
problem, or even
develop a cancer,
while on a so-called
really healthy diet,
whether it's keto, specific carb
diet, paleo diet, any diet--
AIP, autoimmune paleo
diet-- any of them.
Or even vegan diet,
which is high fiber.
These are all really great
diets, but for a person,
and what their health goals
are, it may be very detrimental
long term.
And it's always great
to do testing, testing
before and after and making sure
the health goals are being met.
And I believe everyone
has some unique diet.
It probably has to do a little
bit with their ancestry too.
If they're more
northern European,
they probably can stand
less starches overall.
Some, but not a
ton all the time.
And if the more equatorial--
I'm Asian, so my ancestors
were really dark skin.
We lived along the equator.
And fruits and rice
are fine for us.
We're genetically adapted.
I have certain genetics, like
the APOE alleles designate
the E4s associated with
lot more Alzheimer's,
and carb intolerance,
and diabetes.
So if someone's E4, they're
more usually northern hemisphere
adapted, and they live
away from the equator.
They're not so dark
as me, and they don't
eat as many grains and fruits.
So we look at many
things that may
make what a perfect diet
might be for an individual,
but it can vary I believe.
And one thing I
like about diet, is
that we can change
it and then quickly--
so my microbiome study
showed in just one meal
we can shift our microbiome.
>>SUE: Dr. Grace, where
can people learn more
about what you have to say?
>>GRACE: I'm at the
thegutinstitute.com,
and we have also an
active Facebook page.
I'm on there often,
Tuesday 2:00 o'clock live,
to answer questions,
and talk a little bit
about some subject I love.
>>SUE: Thank you so much
for being with us today.
It is amazing how
deeply we can dive down
the rabbit hole regarding the
microbiome, and the system,
and how important it is in our
overall health, and wellness,
and well-being.
Thank you so much.
>>GRACE: Oh, thank you
so much for having me on.
Such an honor.
Thank you Dr. Sue.
>>SUE: My pleasure.
The Gut Goddess, Dr.
Grace Liu, is turning on
clinicians, researchers,
patients, and even MMA fighters
into looking deeper into their
portfolio of microorganisms,
which live in,
on, and around us.
She's bringing the latest
biome research to the stage.
This information
is a game-changer
for balancing hormone
levels, healing our gut,
and maximizing
resilience to disease.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter,
and thank you
for watching "Healing Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]